## Course Details
**Course Title:** Fundamental of Management
**Course Code:** DS251
**Semester:** Spring
**Instructors:** Dr. Doaa Saleh
**Date:** 19/06/2021
**Exam Duration:** 2 Hours

---

### Question 1: Which of the following statements are true and which are false.

1. Planning involves choosing tasks that must be performed to attain organizational goals, outlining how the tasks must be performed, and indicating when they should be performed.
2. Planning is concerned only with organizational success in the short term, while organizing is concerned with the more distant future (long term).
3. Influencing is the process of assigning the tasks developed under the planning function to various individuals or groups within the organization.
4. Organizing is also commonly referred to as motivating, leading, directing, or actuating.
5. Technical skills involve the ability to apply specialized knowledge and expertise to work-related techniques and procedures.
6. Human skills, unlike technical skills, involve the ability to see the organization as a whole.
7. The affirmative purpose of planning is to minimize risk by reducing the uncertainties surrounding business conditions and clarifying the consequences of related management activities.
8. Organizations exist for various purposes but have the same types of objectives.
9. Suboptimization is the process of assigning subobjectives to the various people or units in the organization based on the organizational objectives.
10. The management by objectives (MBO) approach has been found to be ineffective for nonprofit organizations.
11. A decision that is routine and repetitive, and typically handled in a specific way, is frequently called a non-programmed decision.
12. Decisions made through consensus usually take up lesser time than those made by a single individual.
13. Implementation of the chosen alternative is the final step in the decision-making process.
14. Groupthink is a group decision-making process in which negative feedback on any suggested alternative by any group member is forbidden until all members have presented alternatives that they perceive as valuable.
15. The final step in the organization process is to allocate resources and directives for subtasks.
16. Span of management refers to the number of organizational levels below that of a particular manager's.
17. Recruitment is the process of developing qualities in human resources that will enable them to be more productive and thus contribute more to organizational goal attainment.
18. Wikstrom's human resource inventory forms are meant to be used exclusively for filling managerial positions and cannot be used for filling nonmanagerial positions.
19. The process of guiding the activities of organization members in appropriate directions is called controlling.
20. The basic elements of the interpersonal communication process are the source, the encoder, and the decoder.
21. A task group is a formal group outlined in the chain of command on an organization chart.
22. Measuring performance is the first step in the controlling process.
23. For control to be successful, all individuals involved in controlling must have a working knowledge of how the control process operates.
24. Most managers have substantial control over increasing their position power.

---

### Question 2: Circle the numbering of the most appropriate answer.

**25. Which of the following is an advantage of planning?**
a) eliminates all risks
b) enhances decision coordination
c) emphasizes immediate goals
d) suboptimizes the use of resources
e) promotes individual performance

**26. Which of the following is an error managers make during the controlling stage of management?**
a) not establishing departments appropriately
b) not taking the time to communicate properly with organization members
c) establishing improper communication networks
d) not monitoring progress in carrying out plans
e) not exploring enough viable alternatives for reaching objectives

**27. The more resources unused during the production process, the more _______ the manager.**
a) Inefficient
b) Efficient
c) Ineffective
d) Effective
e) efficient and ineffective

**28. A manager is considered efficient and effective if the manager _______.**
a) does not reach goals and does not waste resources
b) reaches goals and does not waste resources
c) does not reach goals and wastes resources
d) reaches goals and wastes resources
e) wastes resources on unattainable goals

**29. In any organization, change-related activities include _______.**
a) clarifying objectives of jobs in organizations
b) consulting when making decisions
c) providing recognition for achievements and contributions
d) encouraging innovative thinking
e) short-term planning

**30. Trendy Garb is a retail store that sells women's apparel. The store has comprehensive rules, policies, and procedures for matters relating to customer complaints and product returns. Hence, when faced with either of these situations, the store manager simply needs to refer to these guidelines and proceed accordingly. This is an example of a(n) _______.**
a) overlapping responsibility
b) nonprogrammed decision
c) rule of thumb
d) decision tree
e) programmed decision

**31. Which of the following is a traditional technique for solving a programmed decision?**
a) judgment
b) rules of thumb
c) habit
d) intuition
e) training

**32. _______ is the process of establishing orderly uses for resources within the management system.**
a) Organizing
b) Communication
c) Planning
d) Controlling
e) Motivation

**33. _______ is the assignment of various portions of a particular task among a number of organization members.**
a) Participation
b) Job enlargement
c) Division of labor
d) Job rotation
e) Work sharing

**34. Which of the following is an advantage of division of labor?**
a) It broadens the scope of work.
b) It results in high levels of employee motivation.
c) It makes work more interesting.
d) It saves time.
e) It emphasizes the human variable in organizations.

**35. _______ is the initial attraction and screening of the supply of prospective human resources available to fill a position.**
a) Onboarding
b) Promotion
c) Recruitment
d) Prospecting
e) Orientation

**36. Which of the following items is likely to be found in a job specification?**
a) job title
b) working conditions
c) equipment used
d) job summary
e) physical skills

**37. _______ is the process of sharing information with other individuals.**
a) Delegation
b) Communication
c) Allocation
d) Authorization
e) Distribution

**38. The person in the interpersonal communication situation who originates and encodes information to be shared with another person is called the _______.**
a) Presenter
b) Channel
c) Administrator
d) Medium
e) source

**39. Which of the following is a communication macrobarrier?**
a) need for complex information
b) destination's view of the source
c) message interference
d) receivers' perception
e) multimeaning words

**40. Which of the following is considered a microbarrier to organizational communication?**
a) need for better information
b) need to learn new concepts
c) need to learn new languages
d) need to process complex information
e) individuals' perception of messages

**41. A formal group is a group that _______.**
a) is formed by management to perform organizational tasks
b) is normally defined but unstructured
c) is formed by the common interests of group members
d) is formed by the affiliation of the group members
e) is normally unstructured and undefined

**42. Formal groups that handle routine activities and are outlined on an organization chart are called _______.**
a) task groups
b) committees
c) transitory groups
d) work teams
e) command groups

**43. Two formal groups that are often established in organizations are _______ and _______.**
a) transitory groups; recurrent groups
b) interest groups; committees
c) in-groups; out-groups
d) committees; work teams
e) interest groups; work teams

**44. _______ is the systematic effort to compare performance to predetermined standards in order to determine whether performance is in line with those standards, or needs to be corrected.**
a) Planning
b) Organizing
c) Controlling
d) Designing
e) Motivation

**45. _______ and _______ have been called the "Siamese twins of management."**
a) Setting standards; measuring performance
b) Managing; leading
c) Planning; controlling
d) Problems; symptoms
e) Organizing; controlling

**46. The level of activity established to serve as a model for evaluating organizational performance is a(n) _______.**
a) Symptom
b) Problem
c) Standard
d) Correction
e) incentive

**47. _______ is managerial activity aimed at bringing organizational performance up to the level of performance standards.**
a) Laddering
b) Corrective action
c) Reprogramming
d) Market correction
e) Contrarian investing

**48. Because Jamie is the manager, her subordinates follow her instructions. This is an example of _______ power.**
a) Personal
b) position
c) total
d) social
e) absolute
