**Cairo University**
**Faculty of Computers & Information**
**Course: Fundamentals of Management**
**Course Code: DS251 & SHU233**
**Final Exam**
**Duration: 2 Hour**
**Instructor: Dr. Doaa Saleh**
**Date: 29/05/2024**

---

### Question 1: Which of the following statements are true and which are false.

1. The second step in the decision-making process is identifying a problem.
2. In order to preserve their position power, managers should avoid doing personal favors for subordinates.
3. Managers identify a problem by comparing the current state of affairs to some standard.
4. intuitive decision making is systematic, logical, and orderly.
5. A task group is a formal group outlined in the chain of command on an organization chart.
6. Groupthink is a group decision-making process in which negative feedback on any suggested alternative by any group member is forbidden until all members have presented alternatives that they perceive as valuable.
7. Henri Fayol recommends that businesses establish multiple guiding authorities when organizing resources.
8. Bureaucracy can be characterized as a management system with detailed procedures, rules, and a clearly outlined organizational hierarchy with impersonal relationships among organization members.
9. Vertical dimensioning is directly related to the concept of the scalar relationship—that is, the chain of command.
10. The matrix structure is contradictory to the principle of unity of command.
11. The basic elements of the interpersonal communication process are the source, the encoder, and the decoder.
12. The ideal number of committee members for most tasks seems to be from 15 to 20.
13. An interest group is an informal group that forms in organizations because of the personal affiliation members have with one another.
14. Communication is considered a supplementary management skill rather than a fundamental management skill.
15. Good communicators consult with others when planning communications.

---

### Question 2: Circle the numbering of the most appropriate answer.

**16. Which of the following statements is true about corporate social responsibility?**
A. It is the managerial obligation to ensure the accountability of certain individuals in an organization through mechanisms that try to reduce or eliminate the principal-agent problem.
B. It is the managerial obligation to cater to the needs of the stockholders, while abiding by the laws of the society.
C. It is the managerial obligation to take action that protects and improves both the welfare of society as a whole and the interests of the organization.
D. It is the managerial obligation to abide to societal laws when pursuing organizational goals.
E. It is the managerial obligation to ensure ethical decision-making in an organization to benefit its customers.

**17. _______ and _______ have been called the "Siamese twins of management."**
A. Setting standards; measuring performance
B. Managing; leading
C. Planning; controlling
D. Problems; symptoms
E. Organizing; controlling

**18. Which of the following is true about decisions and decision-making?**
A. Managers make decisions primarily when performing the controlling function.
B. In the process of deciding, the alternatives are as important as the choice made.
C. Organizations only have to consider significant decisions that have a major impact on business.
D. Decision making is the process of choosing the best alternative for reaching objectives.
E. All managerial decisions are of equal significance to the organization.

**19. The level of activity established to serve as a model for evaluating organizational performance is a(n) _______.**
A. symptom
B. problem
C. standard
D. correction
E. incentive

**20. Trendy Garb is a retail store that sells women's apparel. The store has comprehensive rules, policies, and procedures for matters relating to customer complaints and product returns. Hence, when faced with either of these situations, the store manager simply needs to refer to these guidelines and proceed accordingly. This is an example of a(n) _______.**
A. overlapping responsibility
B. nonprogrammed decision
C. rule of thumb
D. decision tree
E. programmed decision

**21. Nonprogrammed decisions are _______.**
A. structured
B. one-shot decisions
C. routine and repetitive
D. less time-consuming
E. made by computers

**22. Which of the following is least accurate regarding groups?**
A. They are found in all organizations.
B. An understanding of groups can help managers raise the probability that the groups will cause desirable consequences for the organization.
C. Groups inevitably form in all facets of organizational existence.
D. Groups invariably cause desirable consequences within the organization.
E. Groups are characterized by a size small enough to permit each member to communicate with all other members on a face-to-face basis.

**23. _______ is the management function through which managers compare present performance to preestablished performance standards.**
A. Organizing
B. Influencing
C. Controlling
D. Monitoring
E. Planning

**24. Which of the following arguments provided by Milton Friedman suggests that corporate social responsibility may be unethical?**
A. Corporate social responsibility compels managers to spend money on some individuals that rightfully belongs to other individuals.
B. Corporate social responsibility is not mandated by law, which means that it has to be done by will, not by compulsion.
C. Empirical studies have not yet demonstrated a definitive relationship between corporate social responsibility and profitability.
D. Profitability and growth go hand-in-hand with responsible treatment of employees, customers, and the community.
E. Firms use corporate social responsibility to increase their brand awareness.

**25. _______ includes determining tasks and groupings of work. It should not be rigid, but adaptable and flexible to meet challenges as circumstances change.**
A. Organizing
B. Influencing
C. Controlling
D. Monitoring
E. Planning

**26. Managers can fulfill their social obligation towards consumers by _______.**
A. abiding to the laws
B. providing safe working environments
C. repaying debts
D. increasing the value of the organization
E. providing safe products

**27. As part of the controlling process, you have finished measuring the performance of your team. What must you do next?**
A. Take corrective action.
B. Compare measured performance to standards.
C. Establish a unit of measure to gauge performance.
D. Modify past plans.
E. Restructure control systems and subsystems.

**28. Which of the following is a communication macrobarrier?**
A. need for complex information
B. destination's view of the source
C. message interference
D. receivers' perception
E. multimeaning words

**29. Which of the following statements is true for the management function?**
A. It reaches goals by working with and through people.
B. It is a one-time function in an organization.
C. It is a series of continuing and unrelated activities.
D. It involves and concentrates on reaching individual goals.
E. It does not consider the people aspect of organizations.

**30. Formal groups are commonly divided into _______ and _______.**
A. transitory groups; recurrent groups
B. in-groups; out-groups
C. command groups; task groups
D. interest groups; friendship groups
E. primary groups; secondary groups

**31. Which of the following statements is true about organizing?**
A. It is the process of determining how the organization will achieve its objectives.
B. It is the management process of guiding the activities of organization members to help attain organizational objectives.
C. It is the process of making things happen as they were planned to happen.
D. It is the process of establishing orderly uses for all the organization's resources.

**32. Which of the following is a traditional technique for solving a programmed decision?**
A. judgment
B. rules of thumb
C. habit
D. intuition
E. training

**33. Encoded information the source intends to share with another person is called a(n) _______.**
A. rumor
B. message
C. signal
D. medium
E. code

**34. In which of the following stages of performing social responsibility activities does a manager lead, communicate, motivate, and work with groups to attain the organization's social responsibility objectives?**
A. influencing
B. controlling
C. implementing
D. planning
E. organizing

**35. In business, ethics can be defined as _______.**
A. the capacity to reflect on customer preferences in the corporate decision-making process
B. the capacity to reflect on competitive strategies in the corporate decision-making process
C. the capacity to reflect on values in the corporate decision-making process
D. the capacity to reflect on production bottlenecks in the corporate decision-making process
E. the capacity to reflect on workforce diversity in the corporate decision-making process

**36. _______ is a formal statement that acts as a guide for the ethics of how people within a particular organization should act and make decisions.**
A. A social audit
B. A whistleblower's policy
C. Corporate governance
D. A code of ethics
E. A mission statement

**37. Which of the following actions suggests that an individual is following the golden rule?**
A. Acting in a way you would expect others to act toward you.
B. Taking actions that would be viewed as proper by a disinterested panel of professional peers.
C. Acting in a way that results in the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
D. Taking actions that abide by the laws of the state.
E. Acting in a way that the action taken under the circumstances could be a universal law of behavior.

**38. Name one of the basic concepts for smoothly running an organisation.**
A. Management
B. Planning
C. Coordination
D. None of the options is correct

**39. An informal group that gains and maintains membership primarily because of a common concern members have about a specific issue is called _______.**
A. a work team
B. a friendship group
C. a command group
D. an interest group
E. a committee

**40. At what step of the planning can be processed with the topmost and applicable plan would be implemented?**
A. Setting up objective
B. Developing Premises
C. Selecting up objective
D. Evaluating alternative course of action

**41. A work team composed of people from different functional areas of the organization who are all focused on a specified objective is known as a _______.**
A. a task group
B. cross-functional team
C. a command group
D. special-purpose group
E. self-directed team

**42. In which pace of the planning process, two sides of a coin of each alternative are examined.**
A. Setting up Objective
B. Developing Premises
C. Selecting an alternative premises
D. Evaluating alternatives course of action

**43. One of the benefits of utilizing committees is that _______.**
A. the decision-making process is much quicker than individual decision-making
B. there is no limit on the size of the committee
C. a committee does need a leader or a secretary
D. committees improve the quality of decision-making
E. decision-makers don't have to represent the group they come from

**44. Which of the following is considered the first step toward effective communication?**
A. clarifying the idea or problem to be communicated
B. examining the true purpose of communication
C. consulting with others in planning communication
D. identifying actions that support the message being communicated
E. understanding the total physical and human setting

**45. It is known as planning.**
A. The last function of the manager
B. Primary/First function of the manager
C. Both a) and b)
D. None of the options is correct

**46. Which of the following is a purely procedural step that could be taken to increase the probability that a committee will be successful?**
A. rephrasing ideas already expressed
B. specifying the authority of the committee
C. bringing all members into active participation
D. stimulating further thought by members
E. keeping the goals of the group flexible

**47. Thinking for the future output is known as _______.**
A. Setting planning premises
B. Making derivative plans
C. Making policy
D. All of the options are correct

**48. What is the major purpose of feedback in the communication process?**
A. It is used by the source to ensure successful communication.
B. It can be used to boost the legitimate power of managers.
C. It provides formal documentation of the communication process.
D. It helps the source avoid questions from the destination.
E. It fosters lateral communication in the organization.

**49. The person in the interpersonal communication situation who originates and encodes information to be shared with another person is called the _______.**
A. presenter
B. channel
C. administrator
D. medium
E. source

**50. Which of the following is an example of an interest group?**
A. a group of friends interested in rock music
B. a quarterly work planning group
C. a group meeting to consider the feasibility of a new product
D. a group meeting to prepare the monthly financial reports
E. a group of workers pressing management for better pay

**51. What is the core of making a plan?**
A. Organizing
B. Thinking in Advance
C. Directing
D. All of the above

**52. Which of the following statements about groupthink is true?**
A. Groupthink cannot take place in a newly formed group.
B. A group with high levels of mistrust and conflicts is likely to be most susceptible to groupthink.
C. A group with a high level of cohesiveness is likely to be susceptible to groupthink.
D. Managers must help committees to establish groupthink to generate alternative problem solutions.
E. A group which is highly competitive will most probably result in groupthink.

**53. At what stage of the planning becomes the most feasible plan that can be implemented.**
A. Developing Premises
B. Evaluating alternative course of action
C. Selecting an alternative
D. Setting up objective

**54. _______ is the process of sharing information with other individuals.**
A. Delegation
B. Communication
C. Allocation
D. Authorization
E. Distribution

**55. Planning establishes a ground standard for _______.**
A. Controlling
B. Directing
C. Staffing
D. Organizing

**56. Which of the following is an advantage of division of labor?**
A. It results in easier and more efficient work.
B. It broadens the scope of work.
C. It emphasizes the human variable in organizations.
D. It makes work more interesting.
E. It results in high levels of employee motivation.

**57. Define the term premises?**
A. Running an organization
B. Assumptions about the Future
C. Noting down all the factors
D. None of the above.

**58. Which of the following is one of the three main components of the management system that Weber termed a bureaucracy?**
A. minimum regulations and paperwork
B. close, personal relations among organization members
C. emphasis on the human variable
D. a flat organizational structure
E. a clearly outlined organizational hierarchy

**59. An individual's emotional intelligence is characterized by self-awareness, self-motivation, self-regulation, empathy for others, and _______.**
A. systems thinking
B. formal communication abilities
C. openness to experience
D. adeptness in building relationships
E. superior intellectual capabilities

**60. _______ is the mode of thinking that group members engage in when the desire for agreement so dominates the group that it overrides the need to realistically appraise alternative problem solutions.**
A. Social loafing
B. Group polarization
C. Groupthink
D. Cognitive dissonance
E. Collective intelligence

**61. _______ resources refer to the machines used during the manufacturing process.**
A. Hardware
B. Capital
C. Technology
D. Raw material
E. Monetary

**62. Trot is the CEO of a consulting firm. He plays a key role in guiding the activities of organization members in appropriate directions. This role performed by Trot can be called _______.**
A. communicating
B. influencing
C. collaborating
D. motivating
E. coaching

**63. Organizational communication that does not follow the lines of the organizational chart is specifically called _______.**
A. lateral communication
B. upward communication
C. vertical communication
D. informal communication
E. downward communication

**64. _______ skills are very important to managers at the lower, middle and top levels.**
A. Human
B. Conceptual
C. Technical
D. Strategic
E. Tactical

**65. Gayle has not established appropriate performance standards for her team. This is a fault in the _______ function of management.**
A. organizing
B. influencing
C. controlling
D. monitoring
E. planning

**66. The more resources unused during the production process, the more _______ the manager.**
A. inefficient
B. efficient
C. ineffective
D. effective
E. efficient and ineffective
