**Cairo University**
**Faculty of Computers & Information**
**Course: Fundamentals of Management**
**Course Code: DS251 & SHU233**
**Final Exam**
**Duration: 2 Hour**
**Instructor: Dr. Doaa Saleh**
**Date: 27/05/2025**

---

### Question 1: Which of the following statements are true and which are false.

1. Controlling does not highlight the deviations in the process.
2. Organizing is the process of establishing orderly uses for all resources within the management system.
3. Vertical dimensioning is directly related to the concept of the scalar relationship—that is, the chain of command.
4. Corrective actions are necessary after analyzing the deviations.
5. Human skills, unlike technical skills, involve the ability to see the organization as a whole.
6. An organization that wants to retain an employee may need to assist that employee's spouse in his or her career development as well.
7. The supply of individuals from which to recruit is continually changing, which means that at times, finding appropriate human resources will be much harder than at other times.
8. Wikstrom's human resource inventory forms are meant to be used exclusively for filling managerial positions and cannot be used for filling nonmanagerial positions.
9. A task group is a formal group outlined in the chain of command on an organization chart.
10. The membership of friendship groups in an organization tend to remain static over long periods of time.
11. A people-related step in building an effective team is setting stable goals and priorities for the team.
12. Henri Fayol recommends that businesses establish multiple guiding authorities when organizing resources.
13. Span of management refers to the number of organizational levels below that of a particular manager's.
14. According to the concept of corporate social responsibility, managers should regard societal goals as more important than organizational goals.
15. A programmed decision is typically a one-shot structured decision.

---

### Question 2: Circle the numbering of the most appropriate answer.

**16. What is the main purpose of the management by exception concept?**
a) To focus on minor variances for operational improvements.
b) To minimize management's involvement in all business operations.
c) To involve management in every decision regarding business direction.
d) To notify management only of significant variances from planned results.

**17. Which of the following features is of Formal organization -:**
a) Directed by company rules and regulations
b) Managers are leaders
c) Both (A) and (B)
d) None of these

**18. Name one of the basic concepts for smoothly running an organisation.**
a) Management
b) Planning
c) Coordination
d) None of the options is correct

**19. Organizing is the process of _______ and _______ the activities of an enterprise and**
a) Defining and grouping
b) Allocating and defining
c) Establishing relationships and Grouping
d) Defining and allocating

**20. At what step of the planning can be processed with the topmost and applicable plan would be implemented**
a) Setting up objective
b) Developing Premises
c) Selecting up objective
d) Evaluating alternative course of action

**21. In HRM, what does the term "training and development" refer to?**
a) Evaluating Employee Performance
b) Improving Workplace Decor
c) Enhancing Employee Skills and Knowledge
d) Assessing Compensation and Benefits

**22. It is the process of ensuring that events conform to plans.**
a) Planning
b) Controlling
c) Organising
d) Directing

**23. Organisational structure is a**
a) Framework within which managerial and operating tasks are performed
b) Only managerial task are performed
c) Only operating tasks are performed
d) None of these

**24. In which pace of the planning process, two sides of a coin of each alternative are examined.**
a) Setting up Objective
b) Developing Premises
c) Selecting an alternative premises
d) Evaluating alternatives course of action

**25. Planning is**
a) The last function of the manager
b) Primary/First function of the manager
c) Both a) and b)
d) None of the options is correct

**26. The controlling function is performed by _______.**
a) Top-level management
b) Lower level management
c) Middle level management
d) All of the above

**27. Thinking for the future output is known as _______.**
a) Setting planning premises
b) Making derivative plans
c) Making policy
d) All of the options are correct

**28. What is the point of distinction between formal and informal organization**
a) The managers are the leaders in case of formal organization while in case of informal organization the managers may or may not be the leaders and the leaders are chosen by the groups
b) Formal organization is flexible in nature while informal is rigid in nature
c) None of the above
d) Both (A) and (B)

**29. _______ is the management function through which managers compare present performance to preestablished performance standards.**
a) Organizing
b) Influencing
c) Controlling
d) Monitoring

**30. In the context of the personnel function, what is the significance of job analysis?**
a) Assessing Financial Resources
b) Evaluating Marketing Strategies
c) Defining Job Roles and Responsibilities
d) Improving Workplace

**31. Controlling function brings the management cycle back to the _______.**
a) Organising function
b) Directing function
c) Planning function
d) None of the above

**32. Looking after the change in an organizational environment doesn’t come with any surprises. Addressed importance of planning related to the topic:**
a) Planning reduces the risk of uncertainties
b) Planning provides direction
c) Planning promotes the innovative idea
d) Planning facilitates decision making

**33. Which HRM function is responsible for recruiting and selecting employees?**
a) Compensation and Benefits
b) Employee Relations
c) Recruitment and Selection
d) Training and Devel

**34. Which one is a type of Organizational structures –**
a) Functional structure
b) Responsibility structure
c) Behavioral structure
d) None of the above

**35. Which of the following statements does not highlight the relationship between planning and controlling**
a) Planning and controlling are separable twins of management.
b) Planning without controlling is meaningless; controlling without planning is blind.
c) Planning is prescriptive, controlling is evaluative.
d) Planning and controlling are interrelated and interdependent.

**36. The process of organizing involves following steps A. Identification and division of work , B. Assignment of duties, C. Establishing reporting relationship, D. Departmentalization (Arrange them in correct order)**
a) A -B-C-D
b) B-C-A-D
c) A-D-B-C
d) B- A- D- D

**37. Which of the following would be considered a formal group?**
a) task force for employee birthday celebrations
b) reading group
c) bowling team
d) bringing people from various functions to solve a business dilemma

**38. _______ can be defined as guiding the activities of organization members in appropriate directions.**
a) Organizing
b) Influencing
c) Controlling
d) Monitoring

**39. The information the receiver gets is called _______.**
a) message.
b) output.
c) input.
d) source.

**40. Which of the following is not important for controlling function?**
a) It ensures order and discipline.
b) It restricts coordination in action.
c) It helps in judging the accuracy of standards.
d) It improves employee motivation.

**41. Identify the correct sequence of the steps involved in the controlling process.**
a) Measurement of actual performance, Taking corrective action, Setting performance standards, Comparison of actual performance with standards, Analysing deviations
b) Comparison of actual performance with standards, Setting performance standards. Measurement of actual performance, Analysing deviations, Taking corrective action
c) Setting performance standards, Measurement of actual performance, Comparison of actual performance with standards, Analysing deviations, Taking corrective action
d) Taking corrective action, Measurement of actual performance, Comparison of actual performance with standards, Analysing deviations, Setting performance standards

**42. _______ includes determining tasks and groupings of work. It should not be rigid, but adaptable and flexible to meet challenges as circumstances change.**
a) Organizing
b) Influencing
c) Controlling
d) Monitoring

**43. At what stage of the planning becomes the most feasible plan that can be implemented.**
a) Developing Premises
b) Evaluating alternative course of action
c) Selecting an alternative
d) Setting up objective

**44. In controlling, reducing the workers, absenteeism in a factory by 20% is an example of _______.**
a) Quantitative standard
b) Qualitative standard
c) Deviation
d) None of the above

**45. Which of the following is a method used in group or organisational training needs assessment?**
a) Consideration of current and projected changes
b) Rating scales
c) Interviews
d) Questionnaires

**46. A collection of individuals whose common work experiences result in the development of a system of interpersonal relationships that extend beyond those established by management is a/an _______.**
a) work team
b) task group
c) informal group
d) command group

**47. We can address planning as**
a) The primary function of the manager
b) The Last function of a manager
c) None of the above
d) Both a) and b)

**48. _______ are work groups established by the organization that have designate work assignments and specific tasks.**
a) tasks groups
b) formal groups
c) informal groups
d) cross-functional groups

**49. Which term refers to the process of evaluating and improving employee performance?**
a) Compensation Management
b) Performance Appraisal
c) Employee Engagement
d) Succession Plan

**50. Which one of the following is among the steps of Organizing –**
a) Establishing reporting relationship
b) Assignment of duties
c) Only A
d) Both A and B

**51. Planning establishes a ground standard for**
a) Controlling
b) Directing
c) Staffing
d) Organizing

**52. It helps to cross the gap between the current position and the future**
a) Controlling
b) Planning
c) Directing
d) Organizing

**53. which of the following is an advantage of Functional structure**
a) Functional structure leads to occupational specialization
b) Functional structure promotes better control and coordination within the department
c) None of the above
d) Both (A) and (B)

**54. The basic managerial skill(s) is (are)**
a) To supervise
b) To motivate
c) To stimulate
d) All of these

**55. The actual achievements compared with the objectives of the job is**
a) Job Performance
b) Job evaluation
c) Job description
d) None of these

**56. Which performance appraisal methods consumes a lot of time?**
a) Essay method
b) Rating Scales
c) Critical incident
d) Tests And Observation

**57. Which of the following is a benefit of employee training?**
a) Improves morale
b) Helps people identify with organisational goals
c) Provides a good climate for learning, growth and co-ordination
d) None of these

**58. Which of the following statements about groupthink is true?**
a) Groupthink cannot take place in a newly formed group.
b) A group with high levels of mistrust and conflicts is likely to be most susceptible to groupthink.
c) A group with a high level of cohesiveness is likely to be susceptible to groupthink.
d) Managers must help committees to establish groupthink to generate alternative problem solutions.
e) A group which is highly competitive will most probably result in groupthink.

**59. Which of the following statements is true for the management function?**
A) It reaches goals by working with and through people.
B) It is a one-time function in an organization.
C) It is a series of continuing and unrelated activities.
D) It involves and concentrates on reaching individual goals.
E) It does not consider the people aspect of organizations.

**60. Which of the following is an error managers make during the planning stage of management?**
A) not establishing departments appropriately
B) not emphasizing coordination of organization members
C) not exploring enough viable alternatives for reaching objectives
D) not monitoring progress in carrying out plans
E) not taking the time to communicate properly with organization members
