Cairo University[cite: 1]
Faculty of Computers & Information[cite: 1]
Course: Fundamentals of Management | Course Code: DS122[cite: 1]
Midterm Exam | Duration: 1 Hour | Instructor: Dr. Doaa Saleh | Date: 12/04/2022[cite: 1]

Q1: Which of the following statements are TRUE and which are FALSE.[cite: 1]
1. The four basic management functions are planning, organizing, influencing and controlling.[cite: 1]
2. A programmed decision is typically a one-shot structured decision.[cite: 1]
3. Implementation of the chosen alternative is the final step in the decision-making process.[cite: 1]
4. In the nominal group technique, group members never meet face to face.[cite: 1]
5. Bureaucracy can be characterized as a management system with detailed procedures, rules, and a clearly outlined organizational hierarchy with impersonal relationships among organization members.[cite: 1]
6. Vertical dimensioning is directly related to the concept of the scalar relationship of command. that is, the chain[cite: 1]
7. Span of management refers to the number of organizational levels below that of a particular manager's.[cite: 1]
8. Within a matrix structure, workers are responsible for their original activities along with project activities.[cite: 1]
9. Recruitment is the process of developing qualities in human resources that will enable them to be more productive and thus contribute more to organizational goal attainment.[cite: 1]
10. A job description refers to the characteristics of the individual who should be hired for the job.[cite: 1]

Q2: Circle the number of the most appropriate answer.[cite: 1]
11. Which of the following statements is true for the management functions?[cite: 1]
a. It reaches goals by working with and through people.[cite: 1]
b. It is a one-time function in an organization.[cite: 1]
c. It is a series of continuing and unrelated activities.[cite: 1]
d. It involves and concentrates on reaching individual goals.[cite: 1]
e. It does not consider the people aspect of organizations.[cite: 1]

12. Which of the following is an advantage of planning?[cite: 1]
a. eliminates all risks[cite: 1]
b. enhances decision coordination[cite: 1]
c. emphasizes immediate goals[cite: 1]
d. suboptimizes the use of resources[cite: 1]
e. promotes individual performance[cite: 1]

13. The protective purpose of planning is to[cite: 1]
a. decrease paper work and red tape[cite: 1]
b. increase the degree of organizational success[cite: 1]
c. optimize the use of organizational resources[cite: 1]
d. minimize risk by reducing the uncertainties surrounding business conditions[cite: 1]
e. maximize the organization's ability to leverage environmental opportunities[cite: 1]

14. The last step in the planning process is to[cite: 1]
a. put the plans into action[cite: 1]
b. evaluate the organizational goals[cite: 1]
c. choose the best alternative for reaching objectives[cite: 1]
d. develop the premises upon which each alternative is based[cite: 1]
e. state the organizational objectives[cite: 1]

15. Programmed decisions are[cite: 1]
a. non-structured[cite: 1]
b. one-shot decisions[cite: 1]
c. routine and repetitive[cite: 1]
d. made by top management[cite: 1]
e. made by computers[cite: 1]

16. The proportion of the total management system that a decision will affect is called the[cite: 1]
a. scope of the decision[cite: 1]
b. unity of command[cite: 1]
c. span of control[cite: 1]
d. level of management[cite: 1]
e. discretionary area[cite: 1]

17. A decision.[cite: 1]
is an agreement on a decision by all the individuals involved in making the[cite: 1]
a. Law[cite: 1]
b. Consensus[cite: 1]
c. Fiat[cite: 1]
d. Declaration[cite: 1]
e. clause[cite: 1]

18. The first step in the decision-making process is to[cite: 1]
a. identify possible alternatives for solving an organizational problem[cite: 1]
b. identify organizational objectives[cite: 1]
c. identify an existing problem[cite: 1]
d. gather feedback about an existing problem[cite: 1]
e. implement the selected alternative[cite: 1]

19. refers to situations where the probability that a particular outcome will occur is not known in advance.[cite: 1]
a. Uncertainty[cite: 1]
b. Risk[cite: 1]
c. Unrealistic optimism[cite: 1]
d. Heuristics[cite: 1]
e. Hazard[cite: 1]

20. If $(l)=\$57,500$ and (P) is .3, what is the expected value (EV)?[cite: 1]
a. \$17,250[cite: 1]
b. \$191,666[cite: 1]
c. \$74,750[cite: 1]
d. \$40,250[cite: 1]
e. \$131,466[cite: 1]

21. Which of the following is the first step in the process of brainstorming?[cite: 1]
a. members comment on ideas[cite: 1]
b. group leader chooses members[cite: 1]
c. ideas are evaluated[cite: 1]
d. group members state ideas[cite: 1]
e. ideas are recorded[cite: 1]

22. Decision making using the Delphi technique ends[cite: 1]
a. with a secret ballot which allows members to support their favorite ideas[cite: 1]
b. when group members are allowed to finally meet face to face[cite: 1]
c. after all the responses of all the group members have been consolidated[cite: 1]
d. once a consensus problem solution is reached[cite: 1]
e. after all questionnaires have been scored and tallied[cite: 1]

23. Unity of command is the management principle that recommends that[cite: 1]
a. all managers share the same goals[cite: 1]
b. all employees should accept their formal leader or leaders[cite: 1]
c. an individual have only one boss[cite: 1]
d. organizational plans be consistent with organizational goals[cite: 1]
e. the organizing system be consistent with organizational plans[cite: 1]

24. The of an organization refers to the extent to which firms use lateral subdivisions or specialties within an organization.[cite: 1]
a. Laddering[cite: 1]
b. horizontal dimensioning[cite: 1]
c. vertical integration[cite: 1]
d. vertical dimensioning[cite: 1]
e. backward integration[cite: 1]

25. Which of the following is an advantage of departmentalizing by matrix?[cite: 1]
a. It clarifies the power structure within the firm.[cite: 1]
b. It helps employees prioritize responsibilities.[cite: 1]
c. It facilitates coordination across projects.[cite: 1]
d. It allows firms to achieve unity of command.[cite: 1]
e. It allows firms to pool human resources for short-term and long-term projects.[cite: 1]

26. Which of the following is a disadvantage of departmentalizing by matrix?[cite: 1]
a. It results in duplication of effort.[cite: 1]
b. It can be confusing for employees.[cite: 1]
c. It does not allow firms to maintain flexibility.[cite: 1]
d. It does not allow firms to pool resources for short term projects.[cite: 1]
e. It results in a bureaucratic organization.[cite: 1]

27. Which of the following is a disadvantage of division of labor?[cite: 1]
a. It makes the work more difficult.[cite: 1]
b. It overlooks the human variable in organizations.[cite: 1]
c. It makes work more time-consuming and inefficient.[cite: 1]
d. It prevents workers from specializing at a task.[cite: 1]
e. It requires workers to know about the entire process and not just one task.[cite: 1]

28. Which of the following is the first step in providing appropriate human resources for an organization?[cite: 1]
a. Selection[cite: 1]
b. Orientation[cite: 1]
c. Recruitment[cite: 1]
d. Training[cite: 1]

29. Which of the following items is likely to be found in a job description?[cite: 1]
a. physical effort needed[cite: 1]
b. equipment used[cite: 1]
c. educational qualifications desired[cite: 1]
d. job responsibilities[cite: 1]
e. experience required[cite: 1]

30. is an on-the-job training technique that involves direct critiquing of how well an individual is performing a job.[cite: 1]
a. Programmed learning[cite: 1]
b. Coaching[cite: 1]
c. Lecturing[cite: 1]
d. Overlearning[cite: 1]
e. Position rotation[cite: 1]

Good Luck[cite: 1]
Dr. Doaa Saleh[cite: 1]